import Alert from '@material-ui/lab/Alert';

# Kuberentes Quick Start

<div class="docs-article-toc">
<h3>Contents</h3>

* [Set up a powerful dev environment](#set-up-a-powerful-dev-environment)
* [1. kubectl](#1-kubectl)
* [2. kubectx and kubens](#2-kubectx-and-kubens)
* [3. kube-ps1](#3-kube-ps1)
* [4. kubectl-sudo](#4-kubectl-sudo)
* [5. Local cluster](#5-local-cluster)
* [6. Get started with your new tools](#6-get-started-with-your-new-tools)

</div>

## Set up a powerful dev environment

Kubernetes is a wide and deep system to use and learn.  One thing you can do to hlep yourself out it to set up an efficient and powerful development environment.  Common tasks can be made easier with the right tools.

Except for kubectl, **none of these tools are required for working with Kubernetes**, but they will make your life a lot easier.

## 1. kubectl

  > **The problem it solves:**  
  > I need to interact with my cluster from the terminal.

  1. [Install kubectl from here.](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/)

  Kubectl is the official Kuberentes command-line tool.  You will use it regularly to interact with your cluster, whether deploying applications, inspecting resources, or [diagnosing issues](../howtos/diagnose).

  2. Get a kubeconfig file.

  Kubectl requires a [kubeconfig file](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/organize-cluster-access-kubeconfig/).  This file should be provided by your cluster admin. If you use a managed cluster service like [AWS EKS](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/eks/latest/userguide/create-kubeconfig.html) or [Google Cloud GKE](https://cloud.google.com/kubernetes-engine/docs/how-to/cluster-access-for-kubectl#generate_kubeconfig_entry) the file is typically generated by that provider's CLI tool.

  Save your kubeconfig file to `$HOME/.kube/config`.  

  3. Test kubectl.

  Try the following commands to get the status of your cluster components, your nodes, and a list of pods in the `default` namespace.

  ```
  kubectl get componentstatus
  kubectl get nodes
  kubectl get pods
  ```

  <Alert severity="info">
	  <b>Pro tip:</b> You'll type the same commands a lot using <code>kubectl</code>.  Enabling <a href="https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/kubectl/cheatsheet/#kubectl-autocomplete">auto-complete</a> will save you a lot of keystrokes. While you're at it, add <code>alias k=kubectl</code> to your <code>.bash_profile</code> or <code>.zshrc</code> file and restart your terminal session.
   </Alert>

## 2. kubectx and kubens

  > **The problem they solve:**  
  > It's annoying to switch between multiple contexts and namespaces.

  1. [Install kubectx and kubens from here](https://github.com/ahmetb/kubectx#installation) (kubens is also installed when installing kubectx).

  A kubeconfig file can have connections to multiple clusters, or even different users on the same clusters.  Each of these cluster/user combinations is called a _context_.  A common use case for contexts is working in multiple clusters for test, staging, and production.

  Switching between contexts frequently can be cumbersome, but kubectx makes it easier.

  2. List your current contexts.

  Run `kubectx` with no flags to list your available contexts; the current one will be highlighted.  You might only see one if that's all that specified by your kubeconfig.  If there are multiples, you can switch them with `kubectx <context_name>`.

  3. List your current namespaces.

  Run `kubens` with no flags to list your available namespaces; the current one will be highlighted.

  Working with namespaces is similar to working with contexts in that switching between them can also be cumbersome.  kubens is similar to kubectx, only for switching between namespaces instead of contexts.

  By default, a kubectl command will only run against the `default` namespace.  Working with resources in other namespaces requires the `--namespace` flag to specify a specific namespace.  Kubens removes the need for this by setting your current context to a specific namespace.

  4. Create another namespace.

  ```
  kubectl create namespace test_ns
  ```

  5. Use kubens to switch namespaces.

  ```
  kubens test_ns
  kubens
  ```

  The first command switches your context to the `test_ns` namespace, then `kubens` lists the namespaces again, with `kubens_test` highlighted.  Any commands you run now will apply to this namespace without needing the `--namespace test_ns` flag.

## 3. kube-ps1

  >**The problem it solves:**  
  > I need to know at a glance what context and/or namespace I'm working in (a.k.a. I didn't know that I was working in production when I deleted that namespace 😑)

  1. [Install kube-ps1 from here.](https://github.com/jonmosco/kube-ps1#installing)

  Changing contexts and namespaces is very handy, but still can lead to mistakes if you don't always remember which context and namespace you are working in.  Kube-ps1 adds the current context and namespace to your command prompt, giving a quick visual reminder of where you are at.

  ```
  # before:
  ~ kubectl get pods
    
  # after:
  ~ (⎈|minikube:default) kubectl get pods
  ```

## 4. kubectl-sudo 

  > **The problem it solves:**  
  > I need to make it harder to accidentally run destructive commands.

  1. [Install kubectl-sudo from here.](https://github.com/postfinance/kubectl-sudo#installation)

  This plugin for kubectl adds `sudo` functionality just like on a Linux or macOS terminal. The idea is that you would operate normally as a user with less permissions on the cluster, with certain more powerful commands requiring a `kubectl sudo` to execute as more powerful user.

  2. Setting up kubectl-sudo involves creating ClusterRole and ClusterRoleBindings, the [kubectl-sudo docs](https://github.com/postfinance/kubectl-sudo) walk through creating these resources.

## 5. Local cluster

  > **The problem it solves:**  
  > I need a cluster for testing.

  If you need a small, local cluster for testing, there are many options available such as [minikube](https://minikube.sigs.k8s.io/docs/start/), [MicroK8s](https://microk8s.io/docs), and [K3s](https://rancher.com/docs/k3s/latest/en/quick-start/).

  1. Pick one of these projects and install it.

  The installation process for minikube automatically adds the cluster to your kubeconfig and sets the context for you. You can see the context with kubens and change it as needed.

  MicroK8s installs it's own CLI utility to use to access the cluster, for example: `microk8s kubectl get nodes`.

  K3s requires an [extra step to configure your kubeconfig](https://rancher.com/docs/k3s/latest/en/cluster-access/) after installation.

## 6. Get started with your new tools

  Follow [our guide](../howdoi/codetocluster) on getting code running on your cluster to test out your powerful new Kubernetes dev environment!

  You can also read about [the basics of Kubernetes](../concepts/basics) to learn about the different cluster components and resources.
