# Kubernetes Basics: How can Kubernetes help me code and ship faster?

[Kubernetes](https://www.getambassador.io/docs/edge-stack/latest/topics/concepts/kubernetes-network-architecture/) is an open-source platform for managing containerized workloads and services. Containers are composed of the entire runtime environment, that is, an application and its dependencies, libraries and configuration files to make them portable and predictable across different computing environments. It's a fundamentally different way of designing and packaging software, which offers benefits in terms of velocity and developer efficiency but comes with a learning curve.

Founded to help developers ship and scale cloud-native applications, Kubernetes offers container orchestration that should help development teams reduce, or at least manage, the complexity of scaling their container infrastructure. 

Theoretically, developing applications as smaller, independent services using a developer's technology of choice and running them in a Kubernetes cluster should simplify development. With the isolation of the standalone container, developers have the freedom to push code without worrying about dependencies, and applications should run consistently everywhere. With microservices running in containers, Kubernetes-specific workflow automation enables progressive delivery and automated deployment, and _you're off to the races._

At scale, the reality of Kubernetes and cloud-native development is more complex. Even for seasoned developers, there's some conceptual novelty and adaptation to new ways of working. Development is moving toward a "you build it, you run it" model. The full life cycle of a service, including coding, testing, deployment, and release, becomes a part of the development team's workflow. A developer's main concern might be shipping code faster and releasing applications to end users, but shipping _safely_ has added a new set of considerations to the development of containerized applications. Developers working in this new paradigm are increasingly expected to take responsibility for infrastructure decisions, for example. Kubernetes is the leading framework for specifying and running distributed systems, in large part because Kubernetes reduces some of the new operational complexity and aims to make code release "no big deal" with automated testing and deployment. 

On one hand, development is simplified: containers provide standardized artifacts, and Kubernetes is a standardized way of running these artifacts, so developers don't need to have deep expertise in every technology. On the other hand, cloud-native, Kubernetes-based development and deployment introduces fundamentally new concepts. As the technology expands, it becomes more difficult to separate must-know information, e.g. "just tell me what I need to code and ship", from abstract noise. 

Development itself can be quicker and more independent with containerized apps. But development is only half the picture. The developer experience is fundamentally changing as developers assume an active role in managing the full life cycle of their applications. 