import Alert from '@material-ui/lab/Alert';

Major Changes in $productName$ 2.X
==================================

The 2.X family introduces a number of changes to allow $productName$
to more gracefully handle larger installations, reduce global configuration to
better handle multitenant or multiorganizational installations, reduce memory
footprint, and improve performance. We welcome feedback!! Join us on
[Slack](http://a8r.io/slack) and let us know what you think.

While $productName$ 2 is functionally compatible with $productName$ 1.14, note
that this is a **major version change** and there are important differences between
$productName$ 1.X and $productName$ $version$. For details, read on.

## 1. Configuration API Version `getambassador.io/v3alpha1`

$productName$ 2.0 introduced API version `getambassador.io/v3alpha1` to allow
certain changes in configuration resources that are not backwards compatible with
$productName$ 1.X. The most notable example of change is the addition of the
**mandatory** `Listener` resource; however, there are important changes
in `Host` and `Mapping` as well.

<Alert severity="info">
  $productName$ 2.X supports only API versions <code>getambassador.io/v2</code>
  and <code>getambassador.io/v3alpha1</code>. If you are using any resources with
  older API versions, you will need to upgrade them.
</Alert>

API version `getambassador.io/v3alpha1` replaces `x.getambassador.io/v3alpha1` from
the 2.0 developer previews. `getambassador.io/v3alpha1` may still change as we receive
feedback.

## 2. Kubernetes 1.22 and Structural CRDs

Kubernetes 1.22 requires [<i>structural CRDs</i>](https://kubernetes.io/blog/2019/06/20/crd-structural-schema/).
This change is primarily meant to support better CRD validation, but it also has the
effect that union types are no longer allowed in CRDs: for example, an element that can be
either a string or a list of strings is not allowed. Several such elements appeared in the
`getambassador.io/v2` CRDs, requiring changes. In `getambassador.io/v3alpha1`:

- `ambassador_id` must always be a list of strings
- `Host.mappingSelector` supersedes `Host.selector`, and controls association between Hosts and Mappings
- `Mapping.hostname` supersedes `Mapping.host` and `Mapping.host_regex`
- `Mapping.tls` can only be a string
- `Mapping.labels` always requires maps instead of strings

## 2. `Listener`s, `Host`s, and `Mapping`s

$productName$ 2.0 introduced the new **mandatory** `Listener` CRD, and made some changes
to the `Host` and `Mapping` resources.

### The `Listener` CRD

The new [`Listener` CRD](../../topics/running/listener) defines where and how $productName$ should listen for requests from the network, and which `Host` definitions should be used to process those requests.

**Note that `Listener`s are never created by $productName$, and must be defined by the user.** If you do not
define any `Listener`s, $productName$ will not listen anywhere for connections, and therefore won't do
anything useful. It will log a `WARNING` to this effect.

A `Listener` specifically defines

- `port`: a port number on which to listen for new requests;
- `protocol` and `securityModel`: the protocol stack and security model to use (e.g. `HTTPS` using the `X-Forwarded-Proto` header); and
- `hostBinding`: how to tell if a given `Host` should be associated with this `Listener`:
   - a `Listener` can choose to consider all `Host`s, or only `Host`s in the same namespace as the `Listener`, or
   - a `Listener` can choose to consider only `Host`s with a particular Kubernetes `label`.

**Note that the `hostBinding ` is mandatory.** A `Listener` _must_ specify how to identify the `Host`s to associate with the `Listener`', or the `Listener` will be rejected. This is intended to help prevent cases where a `Listener` mistakenly grabs too many `Host`s: if you truly need a `Listener` that associates with all `Host`s, the easiest way is to tell the `Listener` to look for `Host`s in all namespaces, with no further selectors, for example:

```yaml
apiVersion: getambassador.io/v3alpha1
kind: listener
metadata:
  name: all-hosts-listener
spec:
  port: 8080
  securityModel: XFP
  protocol: HTTPS
  hostBinding:
    namespace:
      from: ALL
```

A `Listener` that has no associated `Host`s will be logged as a `WARNING`, and will not be included in the Envoy configuration generated by $productName$.

Note also that there is no limit on how many `Listener`s may be created, and as such no limit on the number of ports to which a `Host` may be associated.

<Alert severity="info">
  <a href="../../topics/running/listener">Learn more about <code>Listener</code></a>.<br/>
  <a href="../../topics/running/host-crd">Learn more about <code>Host</code></a>.
</Alert>

### Wildcard `Host`s No Longer Created

In $productName$ 1.X, $productName$ would make sure that a wildcard `Host`, with a `hostname` of `"*"`, was always present.
$productName$ 2.X does **not** force a wildcard `Host`: if you need the wildcard behavior, you will need to create
a `Host` with a hostname of `"*"`.

Of particular note is that $productName$ **will not** respond to queries to an IP address unless a wildcard
`Host` is present. If `foo.example.com` resolves to `10.11.12.13`, and the only `Host` has a
`hostname` of `foo.example.com`, then:

- requests to `http://foo.example.com/` will work, but
- requests to `http://10.11.12.13/` will **not** work.

Adding a `Host` with a `hostname` of `"*"` will allow the second query to work.

<Alert severity="info">
  <a href="../../topics/running/host-crd">Learn more about <code>Host</code></a>.
</Alert>

### `Host` and `Mapping` Association

The [`Host` CRD](../../topics/running/host-crd) continues to define information about hostnames, TLS certificates, and how to handle requests that are "secure" (using HTTPS) or "insecure" (using HTTP). The [`Mapping` CRD](../../topics/using/intro-mappings) continues to define how to map the URL space to upstream services.

However, as of $productName$ 2.0, a `Mapping` will not be associated with a `Host` unless at least one of the following is true:

- The `Mapping` specifies a `hostname` attribute that matches the `Host` in question.

   - Note that a `getambassador.io/v2` `Mapping` has `host` and `host_regex`, rather than `hostname`.
      - A `getambassador.io/v3alpha1` `Mapping` will honor `host` and `host_regex` as a transition aid, but `host` and `host_regex` are deprecated in favor of `hostname`.
      - A `Mapping` that specifies `host_regex: true` will be associated with all `Host`s. This is generally far less desirable than using `hostname` with a DNS glob.

- The `Host` specifies a `mappingSelector` that matches the `Mapping`'s Kubernetes `label`s.

   - Note that a `getambassador.io/v2` `Host` has a `selector`, rather than a `mappingSelector`.
      - A `getambassador.io/v3alpha1` `Host` ignores `selector` and, instead, looks only at `mappingSelector`.
      - Where a `selector` got a default value if not specified, `mappingSelector` must be explicitly stated.

Without either a `hostname` match or a `label` match, the `Mapping` will not be associated with the `Host` in question. This is intended to help manage memory consumption with large numbers of `Host`s and large numbers of `Mapping`s.

<Alert severity="info">
  <a href="../../topics/running/host-crd">Learn more about <code>Host</code></a>.<br/>
  <a href="../../topics/using/intro-mappings">Learn more about <code>Mapping</code></a>.
</Alert>

### Independent `Host` Actions

Each `Host` can specify its `requestPolicy.insecure.action` independently of any other `Host`, allowing for HTTP routing as flexible as HTTPS routing.

<Alert severity="info">
  <a href="../../topics/running/host-crd">Learn more about <code>Host</code></a>.
</Alert>

### `Host`, `TLSContext`, and TLS Termination

As of $productName$ 2.0, **`Host`s are required for TLS termination**. It is no longer sufficient to create a [`TLSContext`](../../topics/running/tls/#tlscontext) by itself; the [`Host`](../../topics/running/host-crd) is required.

The minimal setup for TLS termination is therefore a Kubernetes `Secret` of type `kubernetes.io/tls`, and a `Host` that uses it:

```yaml
---
kind: Secret
type: kubernetes.io/tls
metadata:
  name: minimal-secret
data:
  tls secret goes here
---
apiVersion: getambassador.io/v3alpha1
kind: Host
metadata:
  name: minimal-host
spec:
  hostname: minimal.example.com
  tlsSecret:
    name: minimal-secret
```

It is **not** necessary to explicitly state a `TLSContext` in the `Host`: setting `tlsSecret` is enough. Of course, `TLSContext` is still the ideal way to share TLS configuration between more than one `Host`. For further examples, see [Configuring $productName$ Communications](../../howtos/configure-communications).

<Alert severity="info">
  <a href="../../topics/running/host-crd">Learn more about <code>Host</code></a>.<br/>
  <a href="../../topics/running/tls/#tlscontext">Learn more about <code>TLSContext</code></a>.
</Alert>

### `Mapping`s, `TCPMapping`s, and TLS Origination

A `getambassador.io/v2` `Mapping` or `TCPMapping` could specify `tls: true` to indicate TLS origination without supplying a certificate. This is not supported in `getambassador.io/v3alpha1`: instead, use an `https://` prefix on the `service`. In the [Mapping](../../topics/using/mappings/#using-tls), this is straightforward, but [there are more details for the `TCPMapping` when using TLS](../../topics/using/tcpmappings/#tcpmapping-and-tls).

<Alert severity="info">
  <a href="../../topics/using/intro-mappings">Learn more about <code>Mapping</code></a>.
</Alert>

### `Mapping`s and `labels`

The `Mapping` CRD includes a `labels` field, used with rate limiting. The
[syntax of the `labels`](../../topics/using/rate-limits#attaching-labels-to-requests) has changed
for compatibility with Kubernetes 1.22.

<Alert severity="info">
  <a href="../../topics/using/intro-mappings">Learn more about <code>Mapping</code></a>.
</Alert>

### `Host`s and ACME

In $productName$ 2.0, ACME will be disabled if a `Host` does not set `acmeProvider` at all (prior to $productName$ 2.0, not mentioning `acmeProvider` would result in the ACME client attempting, and failing, to start). If `acmeProvider` is set, but `acmeProvider.authority` is not set, the ACME client will continue to default to Let's Encrypt, in order to preserve compatibility with $productName$ prior to $productName$ 2.0. For further examples, see [Configuring $productName$ to Communicate](../../howtos/configure-communications).

<Alert severity="info">
  <a href="../../topics/running/host-crd">Learn more about <code>Host</code></a>.
</Alert>

## 3. Other Changes

### Envoy V3 API by Default

By default, $productName$ 2.X will configure Envoy using the
[V3 Envoy API](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/latest/api-v3/api).

### More Performant Reconfiguration by Default

In $productName$ 1.X, the environment variable `AMBASSADOR_FAST_RECONFIGURE` could be used to enable a higher performance implementation of the code $productName$ uses to validate and generate Envoy configuration. In $productName$ 2.X, this higher-performance mode is always enabled.

### Changes to the `ambassador` `Module`, and the `tls` `Module`

It is no longer possible to configure TLS using the `tls` element of the `ambassador` `Module` or using the `tls` `Module`. Both of these cases are correctly covered by the `TLSContext` resource.

With the introduction of the `Listener` resource, a few settings have moved from the `Module` to the `Listener`.

Configuration for the `PROXY` protocol is part of the `Listener` resource in $productName$ 2.X, so the `use_proxy_protocol` element of the `ambassador` `Module` is no longer supported. Note that the `Listener` resource can configure `PROXY` resource per-`Listener`, rather than having a single global setting. For further information, see the [`Listener` documentation](../../topics/running/listener).

`xff_num_trusted_hops` has been removed from the `Module`, and its functionality has been moved to the `l7Depth` setting in the `Listener` resource.

<Alert severity="info">
  <a href="../../topics/running/listener">Learn more about <code>Listener</code></a>.
</Alert>

### `TLSContext` `redirect_cleartext_from` and `Host` `insecure.additionalPort`

`redirect_cleartext_from` has been removed from the `TLSContext` resource; `insecure.additionalPort` has been removed from the `Host` CRD. Both of these cases are covered by adding additional `Listener`s. For further examples, see [Configuring $productName$ Communications](../../howtos/configure-communications).

### Service Preview No Longer Supported

Service Preview is no longer supported as of $productName$ 2.X, as its use cases are supported by Telepresence.

### Edge Policy Console No Longer Supported

The Edge Policy Console has been removed as of $productName$ 2.X, in favor of Ambassador Cloud.

### `Project` CRD No Longer Supported

The `Project` CRD has been removed as of $productName$ 2.X, in favor of Argo.
