import Alert from '@material-ui/lab/Alert';

# Kubernetes Dev Environment Quick Start

Kubernetes is a wide and deep system to use and learn.  One of the biggest challenges is setting up an efficient and powerful development environment.  Common tasks can be made easier with the right tools, such as changing contexts quicker or focusing work on a specific namespace without remembering the `--namespace` flag on every command.  

## kubectl

`kubectl` is the official Kuberentes command line tool.  It is where is all begins with interacting with your cluster from the terminal, whether deploying applications, insepcting resources, or debuging issues.

[Install `kubectl` from here.](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/)  

`kubectl` requires a [kubeconfig file](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/organize-cluster-access-kubeconfig/).  This file could be provided by your cluster admin. If you use a managed cluster service like [AWS EKS](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/eks/latest/userguide/create-kubeconfig.html) or [Google Cloud GKE](https://cloud.google.com/kubernetes-engine/docs/how-to/cluster-access-for-kubectl#generate_kubeconfig_entry) the file is typically generated by that provider's CLI tool.

The kubeconfig file must be saved to `$HOME/.kube/config`.  When you run a `kubectl` command against the cluster, the file is used to 1) specify the IP or hostname and port that your cluster's API server is listening on, 2) authenticate against the cluster to access the API and, 3) authenticate your user to access your particular cluster permissions.

<Alert severity="info" variant="outlined">
	<b>Pro tip:</b> You'll type the same commands a lot using <code>kubectl</code>.  Enabling <a href="https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/kubectl/cheatsheet/#kubectl-autocomplete">auto-complete</a> will save you a lot of keystrokes. While you're at it, add <code>alias k=kubectl</code> to your <code>.bash_profile</code> or <code>.zshrc</code> file and restart your terminal session.
</Alert>

## kube-ps1

## kubectx

## kubens

## kubectl-sudo 